All right, I'm stopping share. Okay similar. Are you going to share screen as well.
Um, no, actually, but I just posted a link in the chat that you can use to follow along. Perfect. Anything's.
We are going to start now recording.
Okay. So hello everyone.
Perfect. Hello everyone, thanks for being here, and welcome to the third panel of the yellow 2021 dedicated to platforms and software. In today's panel we will have three presenters.
Jason Boyd Jeremy Douglas and Samira Haley's deal, to whom I thank for their participation, each presenter will have 10 to 12 minutes to outline their ideas and arguments and after these presentations discussion will follow so please take your notes.
So let's start with Jason Boyd, who is an associate professor of English, and the director of the Center for Digital Humanities at Ryerson University, where he teaches elite, that believed in narrative games.
His research focuses on digital text and coding and analyses, digital games and believable stories, and we are digital humanities, Jason will discuss theorizing teaching and preserving tablet with us.
So, you have the word, Jason. Thank you.
Thank you. I'll just share my screen now. And we can get started.
Right.
So, so I shared my paper in advance so this is going to be a really kind of just a quick overview of what's in that paper. It basically represents a very, very preliminary foray into delineating and for grounding.
Some of the key issues of what I'm calling tablet from theoretical instructional and preservation and access perspectives, really based on my own experiences and anxieties about teaching and being able to continue to teach and study works of tablets.
So in the first part of my paper clips.
I discussed some of the salient tablet computer features I think are important. The fact that it's a flat screen that has no required, use of peripherals that it's very manipulate you can you know hold in various positions and various bodily postures,
different angles different distances from one space, and you can easily switch between portrait and landscape landscape orientations. And then you know it tablets have touchscreens gyroscopes accelerometers built in microphones cameras and GPS chips so
they come with all these particular of ordinances that can be used for creative purposes.
And I outlined to design paradigms that I've noticed in some of the works that I've looked at when I'm calling the index nickel or digital instrument, which requires the skilled use of a finger or sometimes multiple fingers to manipulate and and move
through transfers, a work of he let tablet.
a transfers, a work of Isla to work, tablet, and then the frame and infinite or mutable page, where the tablet screen becomes essentially a movable viewing window over up when I'm calling a page that extends really in multiple directions beyond the window,
or where the screen frames, a page, which undergoes transformations prompted by multiple types of reader input. So those are just two I've noticed I'm not saying that this is exhausting all the types of you know potential design paradigms that what might
find him in tablet.
I then look at four games that exemplify some of these features and I've just have some clips here that all play well I'm
talking about them just so that people can, you know, get a sense of what they're about. So the first one is Eric lawyer strange rain, which I think you can call a textual instrument, it.
You know about this lawyer says this is actually lawyer himself demonstrating strange rain he says strangely in terms your iPad, iPhone or iPod Touch into a skylight on a rainy day raindrops falling spatter on your screen shifting perspective in 3d as
you tilt your device, like a handheld camera.
Touch the screen and guide the path of the raindrop stepping through the notes of an eerie melody as you go. It's a relaxing intriguing experience it feels as if you're holding a living window in your hands.
So in strange rain the primary challenges to experiment with various combinations of tapping and dragging a range of fingers on or across the screen using various tempos and press durations, allowing one to manipulate images sounds, words and sentences
and various modes there's three modes, or less whisper in story and the story mode has iOS Game Center achievements, 19 and total actually which really encourages the user to persist in teasing out the thoughts of the character Alphonse as he stands in
the rain processing a sister's involvement in a car crash through have to exploring and experimentation.
So, that is strange rain
and Tiger styles.
spider, the secret embrace manner.
The user controls a tip the titular spider who can crawl on surfaces by pressing and dragging your finger on the touchscreen jump between surfaces with a quick finger swipe and spin a web with a tap to anchor a strand of silver on the surface, and to
swipe to jump in attach the other end of the string to a different surface.
This is the court the gaming aspect of spider but a spider subtitle suggests it's also a story or perhaps more accurately a potential story told exclusively through images of the manners rooms and spaces in which the spider moves.
So the story, you know, which is increasingly disquieting and moving as it emerges over the course of the game concerns the fortunes and fates of the apps and Bryce family.
And as the player manipulates the spider it progressively authors room by room, a home, who spider webs really stand as a testimony to it's being utterly devoid of human life, which, despite the game of spinning webs to catch flies and earn points really
ultimately serves to amplify I argue the poignancy of the story, rather than diminish it. So that's spider.
So, for smoke was device six each chapter of this work is essentially one page. It's a sort of text map of the environment in which animals that you see portions of through the window of your tablet screen and you move the window over portions of that
page by dragging your finger on the touch screen.
The idea of the infinite page is based on the concept of the infinite Canvas originated by Scott McCloud.
And it's predicated on a vision of the computer screen as a window rather than a page which so many tablet ebooks still treat the screen as and as MacLeod notes craters do not have to let the restrictions of the page be the primary determinant with a
computer screen so they can have masses of white space or scenery as many panels as they felt was necessary to effectively convey the story so so i think you know this is really interesting realization of Scott McLeod's idea of the, of the infinite canvas.
That doesn't need to be bound by the artificiality of the print Codex page.
And then finally,
there is some union Pollock cons keys certified bangle that imaginary which starts off into parents and functionalities a very conventional ebook returnable pages you know to be swayed with your finger, but it's quickly transformed by text altering animations
and the role of the reader is essentially to assist another character who's trapped in this book to to escape. So the reader has to manipulate many components of their tablet beyond the screen, such as the accelerometer, the brightness setting the microphone
the detachable power cable and the camera.
So I'm going to skip over the section about teaching tablet and the iPad lending pilot I created with my university library but I'm happy to talk about that during the discussion session, and I just want to conclude by briefly touching on the issue of
access and preservation.
So,
you know, tablets, only about a decade old.
And one of the problems is is because of that there's not a lot of user emulation software. It's not easy to emulate the touchscreen using sort of a computer with a mouse and keyboard.
And so I was looking around for places that you know documented, you know, these, these types of tablet works and two I found or I use one is the website and social media channels have a game for your name app and rapper, who's imaginary play through
a used.
And, you know, she has been working for us since 2011 and she's a master rather huge archive of you know videos on, you know, a West games and other things over 6000.
You know that are really invaluable resource for me as a scholar and a teacher, and then there's also this company called game Club, which preserves older games by basically upgrading their code so that they can be played on a more recent operating iOS
or Android systems.
And so it's an interesting you know business model because it basically presupposes that we were going to pay for a service that essentially is there to, you know, recreate old game so that they can be played on modern devices.
And so I was interested to see how the electronic literature directory and the electronic the knowledge base dealt with tablet.
And on the electronic literature directory there was only two words classify as tablet neither of them were. They were basically ported from other systems so I wouldn't really necessarily consider them as a tablet.
The M said knowledge basis tag fatality has nine items but the iPad page has 70 items and the iOS page has 114 items so there's some weird sort of note disparities in terms of the classification there.
The Android page has 44 items.
And I would really sort of, you know, hope that you know one thing that these resources could do to leverage and make use of things like app on rappers huge archive of videos which show what the gameplay is like right rather than just sort of describing
some of the you know more factual details about it and so I don't have any answer for this preservation and access.
You know issue but you know in terms of my own work as a teacher I'd really like to see, you know, resources like this made available for people who want to teach these types of works.
You know in the future. So, that's my very high overview of my, my paper.
Thank you, Jason for the clarity of a presentation for keeping up time and the relevance of the arguments as well as the great examples you have used.
So our next presenter is tomorrow Hayley steel, who is a PhD student in Cultural Studies at the University of California Davis.
She's presently researching analog games and emerging media forums. And she's also involved with the altar globalization movement, being your former Development Director for land action.
She has been a practitioner game runner and maker of interactive narrative media since 2002.
so please proceed. Tamara, Thank you so much true.
So I guess I'm just going to read my paper, nothing is fancy Is it a PowerPoint presentation today. There's a link to the paper in the chat so if you want to follow along, it should be up there if you scroll up a little bit.
Please let me know if it isn't available for some reason but I think it should be publicly visible now.
But Hello.
Thank you so much. I'm So, in analyst role playing games or analog RPG.
Participants co create and collectively inhabit story worlds through role play.
This is to say, to borrow from Jeanette and Montoya that playing an analog RPG, is to engage in the CO creation of day GCS.
In this way, analog RP geez might be thought of as opposed to structuralist form of performance literature.
In so far as the decentralized narrative control, and by removing the non participating audience, these media effectively dismantle fourth wall power relations.
There are two forms of analog RP Geez, that are commonly known table tops and harps.
They are similar. Only a table top concerns itself with CO creating a story verbally through oral storytelling. While Lark is concerned with CO created narratives that are enacted through performance to lurk is to embody your own avatar, as it moves through
a co created analog story world.
To make ALARP is to create a platform, through which power over a narrative is decentralized in a predictable way.
Not all loops use analog code, but many of them do.
and table toppers used databases of possible story outcomes to guide their decentralized storytelling practice.
This style of parsing a fantasy world up into database entry sized chunks that you can deploy at each other using analog code to create a narrative is still the basis of many large platforms today.
This activity of analog code deployment. As part of large has come under scrutiny for a couple decades now.
In one recent criticism sociologist Stephen Dashiell used for those concepts of social capital to explore the power relations inherent in a meta cutting activity and analog RPG is known as rules loitering as Dashiell argues rules lowering ultimately leverage
his power towards players with hegemonic identities, ie white maleness this criticism fuels earlier arguments from within our communities that diabetic code deployment should be removed from analog games all together.
For example, the writers of the dogma 99 Manifesto, which is often cited as starting the Nordic Lark movement in the year 2000. Encourage Lark makers to take a vow of chastity and abstain from using what I call diabetic code as part of their larger platforms.
Criticisms against the use of analog code in Europe are joined by scrutiny by those who question the power relations inherent in physically embodying one's own avatar.
For example, in a recent paper, reflecting on their experience of developing and touring, a Shakespeare game called play the nave.
And this was a digital game.
Gina bloom, and Nicholas Boothman and Evan Bez will argue that having student players physically embody their avatar, in the Shakespeare game, and can be weighed down by levels of out of game power relations, like racism and sex isms that attach themselves
to bodies.
This issue leads to players of certain ethnic backgrounds and gender identities to having a harder time playing their character roles, an issue that might connect to alert phenomenon that I call creep, which is when out of game a symmetrical power relations
creep into the fantasy world you're trying to make with your game as a solution bloom enter team offer digital gaming interventions, in which digital avatars help take the pressure off of players symbolically late and physical bodies.
This solution echoes tactics proposed by digital feminists of the 1980s and 90s, like Donna Hardaway who hoped that cyberspace and digital anonymity would provide refuge from and a means of dismantling systemic forms of oppression, these criticisms, which
might be read as calls to abandon the code from analog our PTs and to abandon the practice of physically embodying one's avatar altogether are met by large maker scholars who have engaged labs embodiment, and rituals of code deployment to extensively,
develop interventions into pervasive forms of systemic inequality.
Some of these approaches include those crafted by large maker scholars Johanna cajoling Sarah Lane Bowman and Mallory Brown, who have been involved in the creation of consent mechanics and community management policies that attempt to remove and address
creep at the level of code meta code, and community organizing through these practices, these large makers create platforms that are what heart and Negri call pre figurative spaces in which desired forms of social change, are enacted, at least at a small
localized scale.
Their efforts have seen the advent of large communities with much higher rates of female and queer players than traditional RPG communities with a ratio of male to female players being close to even, and a higher rate of queer players than the general
population. While love makers, like, Colin Bowman and brown have kept their interventions at the level of the game, and the gaming communities, other large maker scholars, like Junya Kemper have worked to leverage lurk against Real World oppression, with
their theory and practice of a mandatory bleed bleed is a term, developed by loppers to discuss when the emotions of your character bleed into your everyday life.
Typical large scholarship treats bleed as an uncomfortable unwanted thing.
But campus theory of a mandatory bleed embraces it showing how work can be used to overcome internalized forms of systemic oppression and to performative Lee extensively undo what WEB Du Bois has called double consciousness.
These efforts to use the lark mediums unique embodiment and code base play offer game mechanics and scaffolding as interventions into systemic racism and sexism.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much for pointing out out such pressing issues.
We will end now this panel with Jeremy Douglas, who is an associate professor of English at University of California, Santa Barbara, where he researches and beaches interactive narrative electronic poetry games, as well as critical called studies software
studies and information visualization.
Jeremy is also a co author of the reading project, having his work supported by several agencies, and he will talk about geek, as platform for electronic literature author where.
Thank you, Jeremy. Please proceed.
Thank you.
Can people see my screen.
Excellent.
Okay.
Um, this is a presentation on the paper get as platform for electronic literature author where, And I'm just move these controls out of the way. Okay.
I'm including the abstract in the slides, which I'll share but it's also in the program. Um, so
this is about a project and an initiative related to get hub archiving of electronic literature, tools, and community practices, but I want to contextualize this with the history of ephemerality and electronic literature.
This has been a conversation, it was a conversation in the 80s, and in the 90s. I want to ground this particular version of that ongoing conversation about electronic literature's ephemerality which has been part of it as a practice and a scholarship
from the beginning, by pointing to pad the preservation archiving and dissemination project of the eo which grew out of state of the arts and x literature and saw publications such as acid free bits and born again bits come out with early.
More not early but timely interventions in the state of preservation.
Now one of the things pad said was that they conducted a broad survey of an array of digital preservation archiving that was underway around the world.
And that they were convinced that much of what was being done could be effectively applied so this cross this idea of both the need to cross pollinate efforts with all kinds of other forms of digital a document.
of one's own unique to one's own needs, has been evergreen for this conversation. Um, and I want to point to the 2017 book reversals the use of preservation for early electronic writing by multiplying Gregoire as a more recent example of this ongoing
conversation which has evolved in all kinds of all kinds of practices that are now about more than just the preservation of the bits, or the hardware or the the reversals.
And a lot of great work is being done at regards electronic literature lab, I, there's not even time to summarize it all, but I'll mention relevant for our work that they ll has a catalog of software
focused primarily on early historical software that is in collection form that are the kinds of product tools that people have that have that primarily that desktop era would have used in the creation of various forms of electronic literature or on the
computers that ran that kind of electronic literature.
So, I'm, and I'm just saying that a lot of great work is coming out of this group, but I want to point briefly to the cell search engine lm sip ELD and T to etc cell indexes all of this work from all of these different cataloging efforts and the cataloging
efforts and the collections which gather the works are primarily work centric, and sometimes they collect a minimal metadata on tools and software. The, the, and the craft practices that make electronic literature forms and genres possible, but they're
primarily work centered, which is, which is great. Yeah, I'm actually out of its almost 3000 entries actually has 281 entries. Under platform software like entry for twine entry for tracery and entry for ink.
But it's important to understand that what that is is a form of metadata to mark works that share creative ecosystem. It's not a form of archiving to preserve the tools that were used to make twine works, for example, which is a huge ecosystem of it is
libraries templates.
Plugins etc etc that then authors draw on to create time I'm sometimes only using a single piece of software and sometimes also drawing on cookbooks and tool kits and recipes and so on and so forth.
Um, so I'm
I'm sip, as of 2017 is now a public project on GitHub. So it is actually archiving itself to say it's it's a it's a website infrastructure. And that's something that a lot of these organizations are mindful about doing is to is to archive their infrastructure,
but communities of practice, are often are very uneven, and sometimes individual artists and authors and electronic literature can invent a whole genre, which then has practitioners, but there is no custodian or librarian.
To the degree that inclusion in the database is now the publishing event, and the life of a literary work is defined through a trail of linked commentaries and accurate responses.
The Gathering and identification of works becomes itself a creative scholarly activity. And I want to propose.
In addition to works on Creative authoring tools as one of the things that creative and scholarly activity can come to bear on in this ongoing effort, so I'm making the distinction between tools and works.
A work centered approach the electronic literature archives.
Depression class, and a tool centered approach archives of the twine ecosystem.
The big ambition is a curated repository for the tools and practices cookbooks documentation, etc demos templates, etc.
A more completed solution would address multiple platforms, as well as self hosting. Um, but we're going to start out with this proposed demo of the archive for electronic literature as a GitHub project.
Indeed.
Pardon me.
Helen Burgess mentions in publish all the things in
the life and death of electronic literature that one possible model.
We see developing an open source is repotted stories, such as GitHub.
So this GitHub based pilot project is a place that archives and mirrors open source software tools related to electronic literature communities.
It's drawn on a model from archive for processing processing the Creative Computing visual and multimedia programming language. And I'm
processing website and ecosystem is both massive and semi centralized there on a mere five to seven languages and dialects and a mere 10 to 15 platforms and everything runs on those.
So very unlike electronic literature, which has a huge long tail and has hundreds and hundreds of different frameworks of notes that have multiple works in them.
I'm going to.
I actually don't have a time check on this screen, but I'm going to wrap things up briefly by just saying that archive for processing our model, which I created a few years ago and curate currently tracks, 424, different open source projects on GitHub
and periodically backs up an archive them, as well as coordinating with processing.
Live deployed infrastructure so it serves as a backup. If any of these tools that are being distributed globally.
Go down or fail or abandoned or last, um, and it also manages forks in a way that I won't get into, but I'll be happy to take questions about.
So I'll just say briefly that the. The problem here is building the data set to drive the GitHub archive we have the infrastructure already based on archive for processing.
There's repository based discovery of tools, for example, create a list of all of the repos that match a few hundred keyword searches.
Once they're examined and confirmed to be actual electronic literature.
Tools rockin tour informed free, free and co writer, tiny choice tracery etc etc.
There's account based discovery of people in organizations. So we crawl people and friends with people and friends of friends and people sometimes the ones who are the who created these repositories.
To find other people who have created yet more repositories, because he let communities terrible at tagging.
And finally we have topic based discovery where we use indexed and tags system's themselves. this gets a little bit hairy.
It requires a lot of careful combing.
And we run into a lot of problems based to the kind of search infrastructure that's available through open source like GitHub right now. Turning trying to look for kinetic type biography turns into a huge can of worms because you can't even do multiple
keyword search and things aren't marked in that way with with hashes.
So, to conclude history is shaped by the people who seek to preserve it. We have the present decide what to eat, what to put on display and what to put into storage, and what to discard.
So, I think that there will be some pilot projects, probably focused around semi coherent and well documented communities such as interactive fiction and dialogue dialogue based fiction, or chat, chat bot based fiction.
If you were interested and excited.
Please ask questions, or get in touch.
And I hope that I hope that this was interesting.
Thank you so much. Jeremy was indeed very interesting with relevant recommendations that I'm sure we will all consider, and the wonderful proposal for an archive for processing initiative.
Okay, so let's now start with discussion.
This is how I would like to proceed. We have around 30 minutes.
First I will ask, Jason Samira and Jeremy, they would like to comment or ask questions to the other presenters considering that they were aware of their presentations before hand.
And for the general public. You can add Q, or blahs in the chat room.
If you have a question, and want to ask yourselves. Or if you prefer not to turn on your camera and not have your voice recorded just write it on the chat and I will read it for you.
So Jeremy, Jason Samira. Any further comments that you'd like to ask.
or say
just maybe like to ask Jeremy, what you know this this, I have this perception might be, you know, completely incorrect on my part but I felt when I was looking at lm step in the in the ELT, and the stuff that you were talking about, like, do you think
there is, you know, a lot of my concerns are, you know, how do I get this stuff to my students so I can teach it. Right. And I'm wondering if a lot of these activities really are facilitating that or if they're really more kind of, we just want to preserve
a record of it and not necessarily make it accessible for for us and for learning. Is that is that is that a fair perception.
It's a great question, and actually I think that, um, I had a whole section on on the, the GitHub Arctic archive, which I cut for time. And that really is and how much of a community is actually in that the snapshot taken and February 2020.
That was then preserved.
In case of civilization ending disaster right so the software. The software is all safe. It's just very hard to stand your students to like go check that get a copy of it, because it's down at the bottom of a mine in the Arctic Circle.
So, this is kind of the opposite of that in that we're using a working staging area where people can grab software tools from directly GitHub repos can have releases and in fact one of the things that the processing archive does is it intervenes at the
moment that authors and creators and tool makers abandon or or for various reasons their works, and provides continued availability. So, um, so it's a little bit more like a lending library in the digital sense, and then it is like a comprehensive catalog.
The idea is that these are living practices and so GitHub is definitely a barrier to entry to an average group of English literature students but the infrastructure is in place to attach zip files to these to these points and give people downloads and
that's often the way that you can take what's already there and then start lowering and lowering the better area for pedagogical purposes.
Thank you.
You know, I have a question kind of to piggyback on that for both Jason and Jeremy, it seemed like there was it almost a connective thread between your talks relating to, like, preservation and accessibility, like the ability for students to access certain
things or future designers.
And I find myself thinking about how, like archival practices influence contemporary design like do you feel like there's a satisfactory conversation among contemporary creators of a literature about how people are going to access their literature in
10 years, or do you feel that this is something neglected by design communities.
I'll let Jeremy speak to you know the maybe the archival thing but you know one of my concerns that I you know i've you know wondered about and that's why I look particularly at Apple and rapper and game club right because they, they are sort of actually
preserving in a certain way but they're, you know they're his businesses right there. They're there to make a living. Right.
And there was this one point when app on rappers whole YouTube channel got taken down because of a notification of something and it was just like, well, so you can just go disappeared like that right.
And I don't think anyone has actually approached app and rapper and said, you know, do you actually care about archiving and preserving you know all of those places that you've made right and and with the game club thing I find it really interesting because
I'm not sure if that business model is actually a sustainable what right there like the I think the idea is, is that you try to build up a huge catalogue of games that people have an astrologer for and want to keep playing and so that they can pay programmers
to keep recreating them for modern operating systems but.
Is that an archival solution is that a sustainable solution I don't know of any other examples out there so it's it's kind of for me I'm a bit antsy about you know what models are out there that that one could point to
summer I think that maybe my answer would be a question for you, which is it relates to the,
the obligations, our obligations and players obligations to each other in role playing and large practice to the tension between present experience, and some kind of archival or representation or some kind of exterior representation at all.
So, and that is to say, who are the players that are playing for posterity and who are the players who are playing for now right and and that. And so, and then in the intervening in the intervening moment when the curator says, You know, I want to, I
want to fix some of the ephemerality of this material that I love so that evidence of it can endure, is that, you know, let the doctor like do you need a pen to stick the butterfly to the, to the cork board right and and so there's, I guess what I'm what
I'm sort of, you know, answer answering and asking is, is I think there's always going to be this negotiation, where there are multiple stakeholders, some of whom are indifferent to posterity and some of whom are actively hostile to it for their own reasons.
Right.
And they might be because they're their corporations who want, you know, planned obsolescence and scarcity or they might be that actually there's something aesthetically freeing for the artist or for the participant in in the ephemeral experience right.
I'm sorry I forgot to end with a question mark but how would you speak to these issues in your material, you know it's it's really interesting that you that you asked that.
And I'm realizing that this is almost a repeat of a question I asked at the first scholarly large conference that I went to NYU in 2014, like six years ago or the seven now,
in which I made the mistake of asking some members of the Nordic lab community, if we might replicate one of the labs that they had created in 2006 in the States.
There was alert called between earth and sky that had some really interesting gender playability like four genders and you know all this stuff in it as a larger and hacker I was like, oh cool wait you have gender based on Eichler in that game you know
let's try it here.
And when I proposed that their faces dropped, there was this sense of like oh my god how could you ever replicate that experience How could you think to, you know, sort of, invade upon the the sort of artistic ephemeral experience that those who mounted
this piece had, and it wasn't written to be to be replicated.
You know, so I think ephemerality is is definitely a feature of the art medium, and you have learnt makers you know who very much want their work to be, you know, replicated forked imported and then you have those who don't want the content to be forked,
but who often have community management practices and practices of negotiating a GC is that they do try to fork and so there are these different ways, the different features of wire being that the creators will set kind of intend you know okay i don't
i don't want that story to ever be told again but I do think that way of negotiating mechanics about what happens next in the story needs to become the new norm so there there are definitely things, folks want to spread but it's not necessarily the content
in every case. But that's yeah I think that's a great question. Thank you.
Okay, so, Mark is also asking is asking a question to Jeremy but I believe that Jason can also reply. What are your thoughts on preserving iPad apps.
I think this connects both Jeremy and Jason.
I think Mark was maybe suggesting Jeremy had some insights to offer, so that the.
So get, you know, apps on GitHub that are open source of the low hanging fruit right I like to do you know you've got you've got a community of people who actively want people to fork their stuff, and they've made it to the fork and the legal arranged
right you know so you. So you started at start out with like the toy case right where, where iPad apps are like on the same spectrum but but far over on the other end, you know the corporate arrangement that the proprietary hardware, the digital rights
management, and then you've got that that app packages. So, um, I think.
Dean Gregoire has the right idea about the fact that you know hardware hardware archiving is an integral part of that process. Right, it's not just that the hardware is
haptic Lee unique. It's also the fact that it's so intimately tied to the distribution and security model that essentially you need to do. It's a historical reenactment you're essentially it's like you're you're you're like on the East Coast pretending
to be a colonial in colonial times right and you need to get out that iPad, that you could then look side load those app packages that you backed up through iTunes on right so, um, it's the same you know there are similar things with flash which is much
easier that, um, I, I spin up a virtual machine that says it's new grounds.
And I just load my flash packages on them and they all run great, because that's all they do is they check to see if they're running on new grounds and by golly, they are right and and so that's that's a kind of a simple virtual version of the same thing
which is that, um, I have a brilliant
graduate student who Well, actually, she did her dissertation on seed banks, and I'm noted the fact that just because you save up all the genetic material doesn't mean that they're viable if you didn't preserve something about the ecosystem right and
it's a huge, it's, I think that's very true for for the iPad, as well.
You have to have a computer running iTunes, at a minimum, like just imagine everything that that touches that circulation of the app, becoming viable, and then try to recreate as much as possible.
Thank you, Jeremy, Rob. Welcome to the discussion.
I I'm great presentations and really lots of interweaving to think about and I have just a quick observation and then a question, initially to Haley but then to others as well.
I just love this, you know, the archiving question is so interesting historically because yes sometimes creators want their works preserved and sometimes they don't.
But even if they don't, then others want them preserved scholars come in and scrupulously try to preserve things. And it's very interesting to see over history with the older technologies.
How kind of random and arbitrary. The different archiving systems are like we know what we do as books now write books going libraries, but the history of libraries is so odd and, and quirky and the in new technologies if the first key creators begin
to archive it and care about archiving well then everybody just starts to do that because all that just that travels with the art form right like oh well, this is what you do with this, and then art forms that don't preserve, then that travels with that
art form as well. And it's you know it's it's unclear whether Shakespeare wanted preservation of those texts like his palms were the important thing and the place where his day job, and some extent.
So anyway, that my question for for Haley just is.
As you survey the larger world, what kinds of traditions about preservation I love that story about people saying no don't repeat it because again in theater, it's fine to repeat it.
But then they sometimes don't care about preserving it, you know.
But what what archiving traditions are building in the world. And do you think they should be different.
Thank you so much, Rob, that's a great question and it's funny because this is actually making me think of net profit. Shout out to the net profit medium for automatically archiving its practice like wallet wallet unfolding.
But, you know, it there's just such a diversity of of Lark makers. You know, and some, it's it's interesting how depending on the large community there are different concepts of which part of the lark is the thing to preserve you know and then number.
of apps you have communities that publish books of blurb scripts, the lark factory and also has published I think a few anthologies of large scripts at this point you know usually gallery labs and things that you know are kind of
mounted artistically or with like a social theme or something.
With the idea you know that you could run it in the classroom, there's a book called hashtag feminism that Lizzie Stark and Jason Morningstar edited, that has a number of gallery larks or nano alerts that can be played in under an hour that are meant
to demonstrate different facets of feminist discourse.
You know, so there, there are these loops that are activists slurps and artistic loops that sometimes get the largest group treatment that sometimes get preservation that sometimes have the effort to replicate them go through.
Then you have other loops that that don't for a number of reasons and then you have the luck makers who are only interested in the, the platform itself, and, you know, treat the stories as if their content, it's just it's as if you know the alert rate
is just some blogger longer in the blogosphere and they ignore the content of the games but are obsessed with preserving the Codex structure. And in those communities sometimes ALARP rates you know get kind of get the shaft and away and their their work
is under appreciated.
But yeah that's that's a great, a great question. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else would like to ask something.
While I while we think about it.
I, one of the things that your abstracts, not necessarily our presentations, but your abstracts have in common is a pedagogical and an educational concern.
Even if you were not able to address this in your limited time. Jason, for instance, talks about students tablet literacy Samira says that Cody Clark's offer unique opportunities to teach and study code, black for modeling, and even Jeremy's differentiation
between tools, and works, can be, I believe, relevant. So is there anything that you'd like to add, and capture from your papers to add to this discussion regarding education pedagogical issues that these topics raise.
Well, well I'll say briefly that this on this, on the earlier project are archived for processing.
And now this project arise out of pedagogical desire right you know so when at that moment when you want to.
What are all of the tools and Can I can I go and look at all of them and then provide a summary and then pick out, you know, three each for three three week units or something, you know, so there's this kind of the desire to survey or the desire to compile
annotated bibliography of electronic literature creative activity is something that is very easily frustrated because unlike a lot of other communities, it's very diaphanous anything, anything can be any lead offering tool in the hands of the right person,
and many many participants in the compute community do not use similar terminology to describe themselves and in this way they're very unlike a lot of professional development communities who co here around platforms and then use certain vocabulary.
Um, so that means that this is kind of a personal dream for me and that if I can get this thing working. I'll be the first one to use it all the time which is I think a good way to pick projects.
And, and thank you for bringing up that part of my abstract day, I guess I had to cut it under 10 minutes and I was like okay which which partner like keep in which do I cut but um, you know, over the last year, I've been teaching actually was the year
this, the missing year at 2019 to 2020 I work to teach Lark to undergraduate students as part of an experimental class with the mob lab, UC Davis, and something very interesting about that experience because I wanted to teach 1970s era ALARP I didn't
want to teach contemporary art, it's like start with the classics. But this meant training a group of graduate students in running this style of learning.
And so there was like this whole sort of theatrical personnel situation of having to teach these folks who don't know how to use like the code base, you know, data bit bank style are being, how to do that and getting them fluent in time to teach the undergraduate
so it's sort of this, you know, the similar problem only the thing I need to generate is like this analog staff of folks, and it definitely wasn't the type of satisfactory experience that you get, you know, with a community of 20 to 30 fluent loppers
in the codec language so so there's definitely that sort of startup cost and you can't quite archive personnel I guess the way you could if you get an archive of digital media.
So it's a really interesting comparison across across pedagogy is here.
I would just, you know, I really appreciated Jeremy's point you know Dr. degree or you know but hardware archiving because that's been the biggest challenge is the hardware component for for using this in a pedagogical you know using tablet in a pedagogical
context, you know, and I applied some of the challenges we faced with the program there and, you know, I have used as a sort of work around like I had this year I said well just go and look at people's play through this, but, you know, something like
device six is so intimate the story so intimately tied in like the iPad is device for work. It's part of the story, and any actual physical hardware is is really integral to the effect of the story and so you know, I really am sort of resistant to some
sort of simulacra, you know, of those works. you know, being sort of watched a sort of you know a laptop or a desktop computer right so I really, I really want students to have that ability to, you know, use that hardware device that it gets really in
trouble but but you know the challenges of you know constantly making sure that you know the hardware the software and all that other stuff in the loan lending program is all kind of running smoothly, of course a lot of investment on the part of a teacher
right and I'm willing to do that because I'm really passionate about those works but you know I can't expect every you know educate or two to go through that kind of, you know, trouble to teach you know maybe one or two, You know works on the, on the
so it's it's a kind of problem I haven't found a perfect solution for you, Jason. Yes Mr Marino.
Mark,
you raise your hand.
Yeah, sorry, can you hear me okay. Yes. No. yes. Okay.
So it was a fantastic presentation, and this question of preservation is something that we ran into with the kids, he lit exhibit, because we wanted to, to use this piece called yeah up I got so later.
This beautiful piece that is no longer in the iPad store, and why isn't it in the iPad store anymore Well, hard to say. But one reason for things not to be in the iPad stores that you have to pay to keep your works in the iPads store.
Right, so I guess I just wanted to also.
We lost you for a new oxygen mark.
Jake, Jeremy and I have talked about the icebound Compendium. Okay. Well, where's icebound Compendium. All right, well, suddenly, that becomes another issue where Jacob and Aaron have to keep updating their project because of changes to the way I pad
its apps and runs and store. So, I, I love this notion of strategies for preserving, but I think it's also just an artistic community, just to just sort of think about reflect on the ways in which commercial platforms.
You know create a unique challenge for us in ways that maybe they don't for people who are you know stone sculptors perhaps, right, and that you know that that push that people have made from time to time, keep things open source try to, you know, again,
I'm not going to tell Samantha woman not to create awesome apps for VR for pri, you know, for the tablet for these other platforms, but there is a commercial contamination of
of Planned obsolescence. In these platforms that makes it economically, and just practically challenging for the artists who wants their work to live beyond.
This week.
Anyway, I'm sure I'm sure you guys have thoughts on that but there's something I'm thinking about.
I find the terrible irony is that it's it's those kinds of artists who can't put in that kind of time and investment, who use the I. Things like the iPad the tablet in the most creative ways like really really kind of say what can I do with all of the
ordinances that the iPad has those are the ones who are really pushing the envelope.
And they're the ones, maybe the least equipped to constantly deal with the change and updates and iOS and still like, like for instance their employer strange rain can't be played on current iOS so it's you know it's it's it's a terrible Irish.
Yeah, there's some in the, in the cats game book collection at UC Santa Barbara which is primarily print, we examples going back to the 60s.
There's a, there's an early iPod, which had the physical spinning wheel interface for a for a branching path audio books, so you could load a set of tracks onto the as an album onto the iPad.
And then you navigated by following the instructions at the end of each audio clip to then turn like you were turning the pages of a book two different tracks which is scroll by in that little LED screen.
So, the, the collector that did the did the thing where he was like, well, I want to archive this thing I'm going to have to actually archive the iPod with the click wheel.
But that was very very late lightly tied to the cloud. And now I'm.
Yeah. Yes, actually. Yeah but, um, but but but the cloud.
It makes it adds a whole nother level of complexity where even if you have the device and even if you have an era computer, you may not be able to negotiate, putting the work on the device in a reasonable format.
Without the cloud servers which have since been decommissioned or have delisted the work from the store. So you need to crack or or or side load, but the real solution is to preload, right, you have the hardware you installed the licensed version of the
work, it will work when offline for the servers for five minutes, and then you got to keep that device running and now you have strange rain or now you have, you know, PRI.
And it's, it's hard, but it's what's given to us.
Any other question.
Sounds like another grant application to my to my university for my sweet.
Yeah, I do the easiest I start on the shallow end of the pool and slowly work my way towards towards the iPad. I may never get there.
Yes, my brain was going towards legal battles rather than grant applications like EU or their monopoly laws that need to fight this battle but that's, you know, maybe that's already happening.
Similar and the highest your question to, for sure.
Okay, so I'm sure that you have developed this idea in your paper and I will of course read it, but I'd like you to talk a little bit more about your efforts to develop blog consent mechanics in the concept of anti code that you're proposing your abstract,
but again, you're not able to address info here.
Right, right, you know and and I should definitely not take credit for the development of consent mechanics, I'd say the credit for that belongs to.
Bowman brown and control in who have been working for about a decade to develop these practices that can be used to sometimes replace code and Lark with consent base story negotiations and mechanics that kind of move at the level of meta game as well.
But some of the work I've been doing and thinking through recently. And then I had a chance to explore in the critical code studies. Working Group which was very exciting to be part of a thing in 2018.
Thank you, Jeremy and mark for putting that together. Um, but anti code is kind of a movement within large that has been growing out of the UC Irvine Lark movement in which a lark makers will create this sort of art code in a way that is meant to disrupt
assumptions about the things that large code is usually applied to. And there's this alert maker Evan shower, who's created this system port of secrets and, you know, and they take some level of credit for it but you know every large platform is sort
of developed at a community level because you can't get the bugs out without like 10 other people, but he was sort of the instigator of the idea that you could create alert system that disrupts.
Other forms of code pervasive in life, that kind of represent early forms of exchange ability that emerged within capitalism.
And so his idea is that it's sort of an alarm that resists capitalism at the at the codec level, which I found very interesting as someone who's I'm someone who has been part of freakin squat movements where we attempt to create these pre figurative spaces
in which you know it's it's purely friggin no one's interacting with capital, yada yada yada you know so there, there are these sort of types of resistance of forms of exchange ability, you know going on at the semantic level and in those large communities
that might run a parallel to sort of be the autonomous movements from 1970s onward in France.
But, you know, the the large communities definitely aren't engaging in other other kinds of resistance there's a sort of isolation between these two practices, even though some of the language around what they're doing is similar, but yeah I I don't want
to. I could talk for five hours about this and I'm not going to but there's there's definitely interesting work being done on developing forms of code intended to disrupt other forms of code.
And within the analog coding spaces of lineup.
Thank you so much tomorrow.
Well we are almost done, we have two minutes left. Anyone would like to make a final question or a comment.
If not, this, that's just fine.